[THEME MUSIC]
>>GEORGE NOORY: Welcome
to "Beyond Belief."
Jim Bruton, our guest, worked
for "National Geographic"
while living in Africa
making wildlife films.
He then rebuilt
vintage aircraft,
with the last one sadly
crashing and delivering
an unusual near-death
experience for him.
This led to his book,
"The In Between--
A Trip of a Lifetime."
Jim, welcome to "Beyond Belief."
>>JIM BRUTON: Hi, George.
How are you?
>>NOORY: What a story.
>>BRUTON: I know.
I'm very lucky to be here.
I thought about calling the
book, "Back by Popular Demand,"
but--
[LAUGHS]
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
That must have
been a scary time.
We'll get into that in
depth, but my God, I'm
glad you're here.
>>BRUTON: Thank you.
And it's great to be here, and
it's great to share the story.
>>NOORY: Growing up, were you
into technology and things
like that?
I mean, you built your own
airplane, for crying out loud.
>>BRUTON: I know.
I grew up in the '60s, and
like many little boys then,
as we watched the space race
unfold with the target 1969
date for the moon,
many of us would
look at "Popular Mechanics."
You know, we were going
to get the flying saucer
in the garage or the rocket
pack we could fly to school,
or moon tourism
would be coming up.
And it was just an
easy time to be very
optimistic about technology.
And being also a child
with a big imagination,
I loved science fiction.
So that sort of fed some of
the work I would do later on.
And my father became a
pilot during this time,
so I naturally had an
interest in aviation.
And then I realized how much I
loved early aviation, you know,
when you had copper and
brass and wood and fabric,
and the machines looked
like a work of art.
So I sort of fell in love
with that period of aviation.
>>NOORY: Was your father
a commercial pilot?
>>BRUTON: Yes, he was.
He was-- with a private
charter firm, though, yes.
>>NOORY: OK.
Did he ever take you on trips?
>>BRUTON: Oh, gosh, I
probably logged 10,000 hours
by the time I was in high
school as a passenger.
>>NOORY: Unfortunately, you
couldn't get credit for it,
right?
>>BRUTON: I know.
There was no logbook for that.
>>NOORY: Now, let's talk
about building of this plane.
How did you construct it?
It was made out of
wood, I recall, right?
>>BRUTON: Yes.
It was a reproduction of a 1933
Flying Flea, which was French,
and it was designed
with the idea--
it was almost like
it was the birth
of the ultralight movement.
>>NOORY: Single engine?
>>BRUTON: Yes, single engine
right in front of your face.
They used repurposed
motorcycle engines.
It was very small, like
a soapbox derby car.
And you had this wing above
you, one behind your head.
It was very tiny, hence
the name Flying Flea.
And when I was
young, I saw this,
and I thought how whimsical
it looked, like something
out of a Disney cartoon.
So I thought this could be
fun to build and fun to fly.
And like you said, it
was all made out of wood.
It was a basic skeleton of
wood with plywood covering,
a fabric covering.
And then I used a BMW
motorcycle engine as my engine.
>>NOORY: That's a
good size engine.
>>BRUTON: It is.
It's very powerful for that.
And because I'm bigger than the
average Frenchman in the 1930s,
I added a little
extra to the wings
to give me a bit more lift.
But anyway, my
first test flight,
It was a little more
unstable than I had expected.
So on the third--
I'm sorry-- on the
second test flight,
I went out to master its quirks.
And that's when
I lost my engine.
And I couldn't make it
back to the airfield,
because being an
early-model aircraft,
it didn't have a
huge glide ratio.
So it was a very steep--
>>NOORY: It was weighted
down, wasn't it?
>>BRUTON: Yes.
And just not very
clean aerodynamically.
So with that, I--
the only place I
could make it to
was a small pond at a
nearby Boy Scout camp.
And because the front of the
aircraft was shaped like a boat
anyway, I thought not too bad.
And so I aimed for the lake.
I got my engine
started one more time.
And then it quit again.
And I overshot the
bank and just crashed
into all the tree trunks
at about 70 miles an hour,
again in the equivalent
of a soapbox derby car.
>>NOORY: Plane was destroyed.
>>BRUTON: There was no
plane left around me
once I stopped
crashing, just what
I was seat-belted to behind me.
>>NOORY: Were you unconscious?
>>BRUTON: I talked-- luckily
there was a man fishing nearby,
because the park
was normally closed
and it was peaceful
for him, but luckily he
ran over to call 911
and keep me propped up.
And I asked him about
did I say anything?
He said, yeah, you were
just in shock, delirious.
>>NOORY: Were you bloody and--
>>BRUTON: Oh, yes.
Well, both lungs were ruptured.
>>NOORY: Oh, my God.
>>BRUTON: I broke all my ribs.
I had a hole in my lower
back from the engine battery
breaking loose and hitting me.
And my right leg just
was multiple fractures.
And he said that I was not
able to really breathe.
I was just gasping, and
bloody foam was coming out.
>>NOORY: How did
they even get to you
to get you to the hospital?
>>BRUTON: Well,
that's the thing.
If it hadn't been for this man
and him having a cell phone,
I wouldn't be here.
>>NOORY: That
would have been it.
>>BRUTON: Because
my friends were
flying around
looking for me, but I
was up underneath the trees.
>>NOORY: Nobody would
have found you, right?
>>BRUTON: Exactly.
I was underneath a dense canopy.
No one could see me.
So he was able to guide
the helicopter in,
and they landed as
close as they could.
And then, like I said, removing
me was pretty much just cutting
my seat belt, because there
was no aircraft keeping
me enclosed.
And so they flew me up to
Hartford's trauma center
where a waiting team
received me and put me
into a breathing
machine, intubated me
with a breathing tube.
And finally family
members and friends
started showing up two
or three hours later.
>>NOORY: Where did you have
the near-death experience?
>>BRUTON: It was--
OK, we're right there.
They had me in restraints
so that in my delirium
I wouldn't start
removing tubing.
And I escaped the restraints.
>>NOORY: Right.
You pulled yourself out
and stuff like that.
>>BRUTON: Yeah, and I
escaped the restraints.
So they put them--
bigger restraints.
And they told my
wife at the time to--
that with multiple six-plus-hour
operations coming up
for probably a week--
>>NOORY: Oh, my god.
>>BRUTON: --it was best
just put me into a coma.
She agreed, so,
you know, in sort
of trying to piece
it all together,
my belief is that when they
put me into a coma here,
that's when I had my
near-death experience.
>>NOORY: What was it like
for you on the other side?
What can you describe?
>>BRUTON: Sure.
Let me begin by
saying in contrast
to many NDEs, where you have the
tunnel, deceased loved ones--
>>NOORY: The light.
>>BRUTON: Exactly.
Some of these things
that are highly
characteristic of most NDEs--
mine was very different.
Mine was more like I teleported,
and I teleported to a terrace
on a tall building
in what I can only
describe as a
post-apocalyptic landscape.
Imagine New York
or LA 1,000 years
after the meteor hits
or a nuclear blast.
>>NOORY: What's
left of it, right?
>>BRUTON: Exactly.
It's just dead and gray.
And looming above me were
these massive storm clouds.
They just looked like they
were ready to break loose
with the mother of all storms.
Now, I wasn't
afraid or anything.
I would say, in fact, I was
depersonalized to some extent.
There was no emotion,
just acceptance
and taking it all in.
And while I was looking
around, all of a sudden,
I was hit by this
wave of nausea.
And I remember bending
over, and I thought,
I don't know if I can take this.
And as soon as I said that,
I heard this whispering
like a light clacking
of gears off to my left.
And as I looked, I saw this
massive four-story-high
structure.
It looked like an egg
standing on its end,
but it was made
out of latticework,
so you could see through it.
And as I looked through
the open lattice,
I could see slight
movements within.
So I was able to make
my way over to it.
And when I looked
through the latticework,
I could see these
small gears that
were freely suspended in
space just gently moving
as if they were in idle.
And sometimes they would
pass through each other
in a physically
impossible manner.
And some were more in focus.
Some were less in focused.
But any time I looked at
one and focused on it,
I could see what it meant.
And I realized they
each represented moments
from my future.
Because if I saw
myself, I was older.
If I saw my children, they might
be with children of their own
who aren't here yet.
So I realized this.
And then I thought, yeah, I
wonder if I can touch them.
And I put my hand through
the open latticework.
And as I did, one
brushed by my hand.
And when it did, I was
wracked with pain immediately.
And I just reflexively
grabbed it and pulled it out
and threw it away.
And when I did, all of the
gears started spinning around.
And it was at that point
that I said, you know,
what's happening now?
And a disembodied
voice appeared,
if you will, and stayed
with me throughout
the entire experience.
And it said, this is
the process of becoming.
>>NOORY: How do we know
that you weren't dreaming,
hallucinating, your mind
wasn't making this up?
>>BRUTON: Sure.
And that's an
excellent question.
And I totally understand it.
The thing is, they estimate
that maybe 5% of the world's
population has had a
near-death experience, which
is about 60 million more people
than live in the United States.
>>NOORY: That's a lot of people.
>>BRUTON: So to have
that size of a population
with a highly statistically
significant number
of similarities, the light, the
tunnel, the life review, things
like this, I think that right
there points to the fact
that it's more than chance.
And I say chance because to me
a hallucination is something
that I would think
is rather random,
only in that I
haven't heard that,
say, by taking LSD you have
the same types of hallmarks
as you do with an NDE
or something like this.
And I haven't heard
of God telling anybody
to come back and be a serial
killer or something that
random.
Usually everybody comes back
and they're-- it's a reboot
to version 2.0.
It's a much improved version.
As I mention in my book, I
feel very depersonalized,
like I was just stripped
down to the raw Jim,
just as a conscious being.
If someone had come
up to me and said,
if you stay here any
longer you can't go back,
I would say go back where?
To your family.
What family?
Nothing of this world
I was attached to.
>>NOORY: There was
a no connection.
>>BRUTON: Not at all.
And I think the reason that I
was taken that far into just
being a conscious
being and the reason
there was no beautiful
scene around me
is because I could have
been distracted by that.
I was given the opportunity
in reaching inside and finding
these gears that hurt
to remove impediments
to my spiritual
development in my future.
It was like stacking the deck.
Now as I live--
I'm not saying I won't
make wrong decisions,
like I'll make a mistake,
but I have less likelihood
of making a bad decision
for any reason that
could be considered
morally ambiguous,
as we all are tempted.
>>NOORY: You know,
I had a chance
to interview Dr.
Eben Alexander about
his near-death experience.
>>EBEN ALEXANDER: I grew
up in the '60s and '70s.
And like many others
in that generation,
I always knew that science
is the pathway to truth.
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>ALEXANDER: And I
had wanted to believe
what I heard in church, growing
up in a Methodist church
in North Carolina.
But 20 years spent in
neurosurgery, I just
wasn't sure how
conscious awareness could
survive the death of
the brain and body.
And of course, that's why my
experience, which happened back
in November 2008,
shifted everything,
because in fact,
such a severe case
of gram-negative
bacterial meningitis
should have disabled all but
the most rudimentary aspects
of consciousness.
And yet my consciousness
was greatly
enhanced during
the experience when
the human part of my
brain, the neocortex,
was being devastated.
And that completely
violated everything
I learned in neuroscience about
consciousness in the brain.
And it really has come to show
me that the material is wrong,
and in fact, it's parallel to
a lot of what's happening today
in the notion of
philosophy of mind
and understanding
of consciousness
that makes much more sense.
And that's what "Proof of
Heaven" and "Map of Heaven"
are all about.
>>NOORY: A lot of
similarities with what
happened to you, basically.
>>BRUTON: Absolutely.
I feel like we're just
reading from the same page
in different sections.
And I know Eben, and he's
actually reading my book now.
So we do stay in communication.
>>NOORY: Would you welcome going
back to this environment again?
>>BRUTON: Again, that's a great
question, because it was not
pleasant, you know,
because you're
using pain as your guide.
It's not like you're using
a moral compass of scripture
or a mantra or
something like that.
So I will say it was very
uncomfortable being there,
but honestly, I think it was
the best version of myself.
And if I was told I needed to
go back and continue that work,
I'd go in a heartbeat.
>>NOORY: Are you
glad you didn't stay?
>>BRUTON: I am
glad I didn't stay.
There was a point at watching--
every time I removed a gear,
my whole destiny had to
recycle itself around something
that now was missing, you know.
You can't just walk into a room
and there's a big black hole.
And watching the gears
spin over and over
and over and over
again, it was almost
like a little bit of mental
torture after a while.
And I think it was
finally seeing them spin
for the 10,000th time, I said, I
think I can live with this now.
And that's when I had a wrap-up
summation of my experience
and was booted out.
>>NOORY: Dr. Raymond
Moody, the expert
on near-death experiences
was on Gaia's "Legacy" show.
Let's look at what he says
about near-death experiences
and compare it, Jim, to
what happened to you.
>>BRUTON: Sure.
>>RAYMOND MOODY: From
their point of view,
they feel that they
distanced themselves
from their physical body.
And they watch the scene
of the resuscitation
typically from a point
of view above it.
As this progresses, they
eventually wake up to the fact
that, oh, this must be
something to do with death.
And at that point, they enter
into states of consciousness
that, no matter how
articulate they may be,
they say there are
no words for it,
that it's ineffable
or indescribable.
They go through a passageway
into a beautiful light.
They feel comfort,
peace, and joy.
They meet relatives and friends
of theirs who have died,
and they go through panoramic
memory in which everything
they've ever done is
displayed around them
in a sort of holographic,
three-dimensional panorama.
And they come back
from these experiences
with a total new take
on life, thinking
that the most important thing
we can do while we're here
is to learn how to
love, and saying
that they have no
more fear of death
because they feel
that death is just
a transition into
some other reality.
>>NOORY: Not a lot of those
things happened to you.
>>BRUTON: No, and to be
honest, in coming home from
the hospital and
starting to realize, OK,
what happened here--
you know, I'm on my
computer doing research.
I find out about
near-death experiences.
And then I watched some YouTube
videos, or I might order books,
like audio books while
I'm out driving around.
And it was actually
PMH Atwater's book,
"The Rest of the Story,"
I think it was called,
that truly spoke to my type
of near-death experience.
And what's amazing
is she even was
using terms I learned on the
other side to describe it.
So I knew this woman and
I are going to be friends,
and we are.
>>NOORY: Did you
have a spirit guide
meet you or anything like that?
>>BRUTON: No, but
I had that voice.
And it was with that voice--
like, I would say, you know,
what's happening now?
And it would say
what's happening now.
And I'd say-- one time I
said, you know, I don't even
know where or when
these futures are.
And it said, that's
not important.
The answers to what come
tomorrow are a waste.
It's better to understand how
things fit and refit together,
basically how the
universe works.
And at one time I
said, I'm seeing
a growing pile of gears here.
I'm worried.
Am I going to have a shorter
life for doing all this?
And it said, your number of
breaths are already counted.
I worry about your last one.
And for those who make
poor use of their choices
offering fewer possibilities
could be called mercy.
>>NOORY: Interesting.
Has this experience
changed your life?
>>BRUTON: In every
possible way, down
to the finest granular degree.
>>NOORY: Are you a
better person for it?
>>BRUTON: I'd like to think so.
That will be
something, probably,
for other people to decide.
But I will say this.
Many times when I'm sharing
my experience with people,
I feel something
filling the room.
And what's very
rewarding is when
a few people come up
afterwards and say
they felt the same thing.
And I think that's because
one of the things that
was said to me was
everything is interconnected,
and it's important to pay
attention to our relationships.
So I think that improved my
sense of empathy with people,
and I think that's what
they're responding to.
>>NOORY: Is there any fear
involved in this, Jim,
when you're in this state?
>>BRUTON: Not at all.
>>NOORY: Nothing.
>>BRUTON: No, for me, it
was just pure acceptance.
And like Dr. Moody says,
there's a loss of fear of death.
I did notice
something interesting
when I was first
sharing my story.
I wanted to talk about
it in the present tense.
Dr. Moody, one morning
on an interview,
said a lot of people who
have this experience use
the present tense.
It's called [INAUDIBLE].
And it's an odd--
I think Plato used this
turn of phrase, if you will.
But it was really interesting
how it is an instinct.
And I think that's because that
moment always lives for us.
It does not fade.
>>NOORY: At what
point did the pain,
the physical pain go away?
>>BRUTON: Well, when I awoke,
when I came out of the coma,
I would say it was another
week before I really
had much of a memory,
because still coming out
of the anesthesia.
>>NOORY: Oh, you're groggy
and stuff like that.
>>BRUTON: Oh, gosh, yes.
And so my first
memory was actually
in a rehabilitation hospital.
And by now, I'm on all
kinds of painkillers.
>>NOORY: Are you on your
own lungs by this time?
>>BRUTON: Yes.
Yeah.
The only thing I
really noticed was
this huge scar running down my
leg and a cage my leg was in.
I wasn't even aware of
some of the injuries
until they told me them.
I was having no
trouble breathing.
My ribs--
>>NOORY: I'm amazed
you're still alive.
>>BRUTON: [LAUGHS]
I know, right?
>>NOORY: It's incredible.
>>BRUTON: Still this
side of the grass.
Yeah.
>>NOORY: But would you
go through this again?
>>BRUTON: You know,
someone asked me--
let me answer it this way.
Someone asked me--
someone who's actually
a vice president of the American
Psychical Institute in New York
that William James in the 1800s
founded, she said on that day,
did you have a bad
premonition about flying?
And I said, that's a perfect
question for you to ask.
I said, but let's take
it out a little further.
Beyond premonition, if I'd
had full knowledge of what
was getting ready
to happen, would I
have had the guts to get
into the cockpit anyway?
Because if God says, I need
to bring you over here,
and I'm going to give you
personal one-on-one time
for a week, what price
is too great to pay?
And do you think you're
really getting out of it?
So all I can say is I'm
grateful for having gone.
I don't know that I could
make the right decision
to get in the cockpit anyway.
But I think at least being able
to articulate the question may
be enough for now.
>>NOORY: What message
do you think you've
learned from all of this?
>>BRUTON: I think
the big message is--
one thing I was told--
it said, all the force
of will you'll ever need is
found in the art of letting go.
Always live life in celebration
of the individual spirit,
for no one and no thing can
stand before the brilliance
of a truly naked soul.
>>NOORY: It's poetic.
>>BRUTON: That's going to be
the subject of my second book,
"The Practice in Between--
The Art of Letting Go."
>>NOORY: Are you
scared of dying?
>>BRUTON: Not at all.
Not at all.
Because it's like
changing channels.
You know, when you change
channels on television,
you even think about what
you just left behind.
You're thinking about, OK,
this is what's in front of me.
And it's a lot like that.
And I think there's
also almost a waking up
into who you more really are.
And you realize this
was like a dream
and we were reading from a
script, and the lights came up
and the curtains closed.
>>NOORY: For some people
who have these experiences,
they see loved ones.
They see Jesus.
They think they see God.
They definitely see angels.
You had none of that.
>>BRUTON: Right.
And I have a
particular perspective
I want to vet out on that,
in that we see life here
through the filters we want.
You know, when we
look in a mirror,
we see the best-looking person,
and there's no sweeter sound
to our ears than our own name.
But on the other
side, we see life
through the filters we need.
And when we look through
the mirror there,
we see an image based
on truth, warts and all.
And I've wondered if,
on the other side,
if we really are seeing
those we think we know,
or if they're just helping
spirits that are there
to kind of tell you to stop
hyperventilating, you know,
talk you off the ledge.
You're dead, but
you're alive, you know.
It's just your body.
You're OK.
>>NOORY: Don't worry.
Don't worry.
>>BRUTON: Exactly.
And I've really wondered if
it's that, because personally,
I mean, unless we
believe in some type
of simultaneous
multiple universe thing
where you can be everywhere
there is to be instantly,
I wonder do my grandmother and
grandfather have nothing better
to do than wait around
for me to show up?
>>NOORY: You don't seem like
a bad guy at all, Jim, at all.
So let me preface all that.
What are the possibilities
you see the devil?
Is that conceivable?
>>BRUTON: I think
that we project
a lot of that ourselves.
There's an old saying where a
mystic could meditate and rise
above the body.
And one day he went to hell.
And he's standing on
the cliffs looking up
out upon the plains below.
And he sees all
these tiny fires.
And he looked beside
him and he saw Lucifer.
And he goes, what
are all the fires?
And Lucifer said, these are the
individual souls in torment.
And the man said, I guess
you stay pretty busy.
And Lucifer said,
what do you mean?
Because keeping
those fires going.
Lucifer said, you
don't understand.
They bring the fires themselves.
We create our reality.
And if we-- and we
go to where our--
to use one phrase, a
vibrational frequency.
I mean, you know when
you're around people
who make you feel really good.
They believe in you, and
you feel a certain way.
And then you're
around people who
may be trying to bring you
down, and you feel that way too.
And some people just don't
seem to be happy unless they're
miserable about something.
These are the people who
take their own fires.
>>NOORY: Do you
wish you would have
had one of the typical
near-death experiences?
>>BRUTON: I think I was
given exactly what I
needed at the time.
And I believe that place
only existed for the time
I was there, and I'm pretty
sure that one of these days when
it's finally time to either
go short-term or go long-term,
I'll have again what I
need, and it'll probably
fall in line, perhaps, with
more of what has been reported.
>>NOORY: When you get
out of the coma, Jim,
do you meet with a therapist
or a psychiatrist or anybody
like that to kind of
take you through this?
>>BRUTON: See, that's
the important part,
is after you have a near-death
experience-- remember
how you were asking how do you
know it wasn't a hallucination?
>>NOORY: Right.
>>BRUTON: Well, one
of the after-effects
are, you blow up light bulbs.
Your computer acts strange.
The television turns on and off.
I have a friend who has an
NDE who has electric car,
and the dashboard is
going crazy all the time.
These are the things
that certainly tell you
it's not a hallucination.
>>NOORY: After the fact.
>>BRUTON: After the fact.
And then following that,
as you sort of say, OK,
what happens now?
Is what was true
yesterday true today?
This is the integration phase.
And while PMH says this
could be seven to 10 years,
honestly, I think
it's a lifetime.
I think you're
every day waking up
to being a new person
with new insights
and just everything
is new all the time.
So I think it's
important to remember
that as you're processing
the integration phase.
The challenge is
finding a therapist
who will recognize the
validity of your experience.
And I will say this, that
with a 78% divorce rate
in the near-death world,
because you change so--
>>NOORY: After the fact?
>>BRUTON: Yes.
You change so fundamentally.
>>NOORY: That's huge.
>>BRUTON: It
introduces an ambiguity
into the relationship.
There's no relationship
that welcomes
this type of ambiguity.
So when you go to see
a marriage therapist
and try to find a way to
reconcile these differences,
if you don't find
a therapist who
does recognize that validity,
it can be a little bit
two against one.
I would say don't go.
Do not go until you find
someone who can be open to that
and help you understand
what you're going through.
IANDS, the International
Association of Near-Death
Studies, does have a website.
They do have a
page that indicates
where some of these
therapists who
are NDE-friendly, we'll call,
are throughout the United
States.
I would say it's
well worth your time
trying to find someone like
that who can sort of speak
both languages, you know,
who can understand what
your spouse is going through.
Because in this, there are
no good and bad people,
just overwhelmed people.
>>NOORY: It's interesting,
though, that the divorce
rate is that high.
>>BRUTON: Which is
about 50% higher
than an already epidemic rate.
>>NOORY: Because you've changed.
They haven't.
>>BRUTON: That's right.
And they're just
like, where are you?
Where are our hopes and dreams?
>>NOORY: Who initiates
the divorce, generally?
>>BRUTON: I don't know.
You know, I would say generally,
probably the person who feels
left behind, because
the person who's
had the experience, many
times they don't recognize
just how much they've changed.
Whereas the person
who is left behind--
>>NOORY: They see it.
>>BRUTON: To very
subtle degrees.
>>NOORY: I see.
>>BRUTON: And they're
like, OK, I thought
we were going to do this.
Well, that's not
important to me anymore.
My values have changed.
Or something big
happens, and the way
you all would have
responded to it as a team
has now changed as well.
So just add that up
over days and days,
and you can see where
this schism can occur.
>>NOORY: Author Anita
Moorjani was on the Gaia show
"Inspirations."
Let's look at her.
>>BRUTON: She's
an amazing story.
>>ANITA MOORJANI: When I
started to open my eyes,
everybody was really
shocked that I
was coming out of the coma.
And--
>>LISA GARR: Was that your
vitals started coming back
and your--
>>MOORJANI: Yep.
And within a day, I didn't
need the oxygen anymore.
By the following day,
I was telling them
they can remove the
food tube, that I
was ready to eat solid foods.
The doctors wouldn't believe me.
And they said, no, we've got
to keep the food tube in.
And I said, no, I'm ready.
I know I'm going to be fine.
And I started to
tell them things,
like I recognized the doctor
who was there to see us
when we entered the hospital.
You know, when he walked
in the room, I said,
good afternoon, Dr. Chan.
And he said, how did
you recognize me?
And I said, aren't
you the doctor
that was there when we
came into the hospital?
And he said, but
you were in a coma.
How could you have seen me?
And things like
that were happening.
And then I was
saying to my husband,
isn't he the doctor
that said I'm not going
to make it through the night?
And my husband said he didn't
even say that in the room.
He said that outside,
down the corridor
in the nurses' station.
>>GARR: Oh, my goodness.
>>MOORJANI: And so all kinds
of these things were happening.
And I was telling them all
the procedures they did.
I said, oh, at 5:00
AM yesterday morning--
>>GARR: Wow.
>>MOORJANI: --you were
removing fluid from my lungs.
You put a needle
through my back.
And again, the doctor said,
but how did you even know that?
So they knew that
something had happened.
But within four days, my
tumors had shrunk by 70%.
>>GARR: 70%?
What were the doctors saying?
>>MOORJANI: They
didn't even know what
to write in my medical records.
My oncologist who was treating
me, he actually said that.
He said, I don't even
know what to write
in your medical records.
And he kind of joked
and made this gesture
of throwing it in the
dustbin, in the waste bin.
>>GARR: Because science
couldn't explain it.
>>MOORJANI: Couldn't.
And he couldn't explain it.
Science couldn't explain it.
>>GARR: Yeah.
Yeah.
>>MOORJANI: But
the feeling I had
in me was not that my body
was going to heal quickly.
It was that I was
already healed,
but my body had to catch up.
That was the feeling.
>>NOORY: She had an amazing
experience, didn't she?
>>BRUTON: She did.
I listened to all of her books
when I was first digging in.
And she's an amazing person
with an amazing story.
>>NOORY: Did you
see any similarities
between your situation and hers?
>>BRUTON: Not so much, really.
>>NOORY: They're all
different, aren't they?
>>BRUTON: They are different,
but what's interesting
is how the effects can
be the same, from not
being afraid of death to
a greater sense of empathy
and wanting to help.
>>NOORY: Are you any
more psychically inclined
or anything like that?
>>BRUTON: I've had a few
really interesting experiences.
I'll say there have been some
experiences along the lines
of healing, but what's
interesting is I've actually
seen my two children and
my wife change appearance
in front of me, like
their faces change.
>>NOORY: Shapeshifting.
>>BRUTON: Yes.
And I realized in
all three cases,
the children were going
to her office party,
and she would lease
jets, so it was going
to be a very good office party.
But they had to be on their best
behavior and nicely dressed.
So in that case, their
energy state was heightened,
and they were having to be other
people than who they normally
are.
With my former wife, she was
going to a community play.
She had a starring role.
And as she walked up the
sidewalk with her clothes
for her scene changes, the
same thing was going on.
She looked Spanish.
Then she looked Italian.
And I knew what was going on.
And then I realized her
energy state is higher,
and she's having to be someone
else other than who she is.
She has to be her characters.
So I think it's almost
like a visual component
to empathy, where
you can actually
see the emotional state within
someone, and it projects out
and appears to
change their shape.
>>NOORY: Do you have any
nightmares or anything
like that, after effects?
>>BRUTON: Not at all.
No.
>>NOORY: Nothing.
>>BRUTON: I do not.
And--
>>NOORY: Is that
unusual that you don't?
>>BRUTON: No.
I don't know that
a lot of NDEers do.
But I will say this.
Most of us wake up at odd
hours of the night, 2:00, 3:00,
4:00 AM in the morning.
And I'm very aware
that I'm coming back
from somewhere else, not that
I have a lot of memories of it,
but just that my mind
works very differently.
I'm perceiving information
in a more non-linear fashion
than a linear fashion.
>>NOORY: Is it emotional?
>>BRUTON: No.
>>NOORY: I mean, do you
find yourself crying
more or anything like that?
>>BRUTON: Well,
that's interesting.
I would, overall, say I'm
not that emotional a person.
However, there are some stories
I hear, usually about sacrifice
that people are making
for others, that really
goes straight to my heart.
And I think I probably have
shed a tear or two unexpectedly
and suddenly in
hearing these stories,
because it is such a
beautiful side of humanity.
>>NOORY: Were the
medical personnel
interested in your NDE?
>>BRUTON: My nurse was.
She's the first person
I told my experience to.
And when I did,
she started crying.
And I said, why are you crying?
She said, I don't
want you to die.
I said, well, you're a nurse
in a hospital, you know.
You see it all the time.
She goes, but you're magical.
She knew already.
And I said, OK.
What do you mean by that?
>>NOORY: She'd
heard this before,
though, I take it, from others.
>>BRUTON: She might have.
But in my case, she
said, everybody here
gets one doctor a day
for, like, 10 minutes,
because we're all busy.
For some reason, you have
three to five doctors in here
for up to an hour and a half.
And I walk by
listening, and you're
talking about life, the
universe, and everything,
and nothing about
your medical case.
She says, I've never
seen anything like it.
They want to be in your space.
And one of them wants
you to be in business
so badly he has you at night
on international conference
calls with your leg up
in the air in its cage,
and you're doped
up on painkillers.
So I think that
was where I started
to see the emergence of this
hyper empathy, if you will.
>>NOORY: Jim, Regina Meredith
interviewed author Rajiv Parti,
who talked about his
near-death experience
and how it changed his life.
>>REGINA MEREDITH:
When you came back--
let's kind of go through a
little bit chronologically.
First of all, you had to
go through withdrawals--
>>RAJIV PARTI: Yeah.
>>MEREDITH: --from all of the
drugs that you had been on.
>>PARTI: But it was
not that difficult.
>>MEREDITH: Because you'd
been through this experience.
>>PARTI: Through
this experience.
>>MEREDITH: Yeah.
>>PARTI: I could-- yeah.
>>MEREDITH: And
another thing you
did that was interesting to
start making your life more
manageable so you could even
imagine how you could continue
to afford to do what you
do without your job was you
swapped houses with somebody.
>>PARTI: Yeah, there was a--
the way the universe
works, you know, my house
was almost a $3
million house, which
is a big house in Bakersfield.
It's hard to sell those houses.
>>MEREDITH: Oh, yeah, yeah.
>>PARTI: And there
was a plastic surgeon
who had a small house
from his residency days.
And I wanted to downsize my
lifestyle and everything.
And he wanted to upscale--
>>MEREDITH: Super size.
>>PARTI: Super size it.
So we literally
exchanged our houses.
There was no real
estate agent involved.
We just went to
an escrow company,
and we did the paperwork.
>>MEREDITH: Now,
after that happened,
how did your wife
feel on the news
that you were going to be
leaving your job, which you
did, and downsizing your life?
Because she'd gotten
used to all these perks.
>>PARTI: She was
used to these perks.
But in the beginning part,
because of her marriage
and everything she supported me.
And marriage was much,
much better also,
because I was a
different person.
I was more sympathetic.
I was more listening to her.
But then second part will
come when we reach there.
>>MEREDITH: Yes.
And then your son--
finally one day you were
all in the kitchen together,
and you finally asked him, do
you even want to be a doctor?
>>PARTI: I finally asked
him, and he said, no.
And he had just
flunked his exam.
>>MEREDITH: Yeah.
>>PARTI: And he was expecting
me to be very angry.
But I said, no, beta.
Beta means my son.
Beta do whatever you want to do.
And he said he wants
to go in computers.
And fast-forwarding
to now, he's just
graduated from computers in
University of San Francisco,
and found his job
and his passion.
And he's very happy.
>>MEREDITH: Yeah,
that's wonderful.
>>PARTI: He's not making
the money he would have made
as a doctor, but--
>>MEREDITH: But
he loves his life.
>>PARTI: He loves his
life, and he's happy.
>>MEREDITH: Yeah.
OK.
And so now you've
informed everyone.
You've informed your
colleagues you're leaving.
>>PARTI: Yeah.
>>MEREDITH: And now you
start meditating regularly.
>>PARTI: Yeah.
>>MEREDITH: And you
start finding your way.
How am I supposed
to help people?
>>PARTI: Yeah.
>>NOORY: Some people go through
a tremendous metamorphosis,
don't they?
>>BRUTON: They do.
He nailed it, too,
in so many ways.
You do.
You tend to want to
simplify your life.
And the things that had
more importance, that
are, we can say, kind
of on the peripheral,
don't have quite as much luster.
>>NOORY: Why did his
marriage get better?
Yours did not.
>>BRUTON: Not everyone is ready
to walk this path, even as
a companion.
And people deal with
that type of stress
and that type of,
as I mentioned,
ambiguity in different ways.
Some people are in
greater need of certainty.
I will say, noticing
that their culture is
Indian, that's
much more friendly
to a non-dual mentality.
Here we're very dual.
>>NOORY: From the get-go.
>>BRUTON: Very binary.
You either are or you aren't.
You're either on
board or you're not.
And ambiguity, there's
no room for that.
So I think that introduces
a certain challenge
from a cultural level.
>>NOORY: Jim, what did you
learn about life since your NDE?
>>BRUTON: He touched
on one thing,
and I could mention this,
that the problem in trying
to figure out what we're
doing here, you know, what
our purpose in life is, many
times through our parents
or our friends or other social
influences, they'll try to say,
well, this is what you should
do based on you're good at this.
But the challenge
there is that you
could be in danger of
living someone else's life.
And if instead, you don't
want to be a doctor,
but say, you want to be
an artist or a dancer,
you know you're going to hear
about it from most families.
But what if that's your destiny?
What if that's your
contribution to making
the world a much better place?
And we need to be much more
supportive of each other
and be each other's
cheerleaders.
We really have nothing to
lose in the end by doing this,
because you can go
out there and feel
free to find your own answers
and wherever life takes you,
and if that's not
the right direction,
it'll become self-evident.
You're a conscious human being.
You'll change course.
And again, with
our support, you'll
get to where you need to be.
That's what we need to do.
>>NOORY: Are you
in a support group
now, other people who had
NDEs, or anything like that?
>>BRUTON: You know,
it's interesting.
Thank heavens for our
social media today
and programs like yours, because
we do discover each other,
and we find each other.
And so for myself, I'd say
it's sort of been a support
group I've built myself.
And--
>>NOORY: I've
noticed that you've
gotten to know a lot of
people who have written books
about NDEs and
things like that, who
have gone through similar
things than you have.
>>BRUTON: True.
>>NOORY: You've kind
of migrated together.
>>BRUTON: It's true.
And I think that's part of--
I would almost say that when
you have a near-death experience
it reharmonizes you to live in
the natural order of things,
whether you choose to
or not, but your feet
are pointed in the
right direction.
And I think when
you live that truth
and you walk in that
direction, you suddenly
realize other people
are walking next to you,
and you make friends with them.
And that's symbolic of, like
I said, the sense of community
I've been able to build with
so many wonderful people who
have this experience, and we
can speak the same language.
>>NOORY: If you were on
the other side already
and somebody passes on and
has a near-death experience
and you're there to greet
them, what do you tell them?
>>BRUTON: Again, I think
there, you actually
can see things
much more clearly.
Like you can see
the life in things.
And I believe that
people can just
read you very well over there.
So I think in reading
this person showing up,
I would have an innate
understanding of what
they need right now.
And as I mentioned
before, if it's showing up
as a grandmother or
grandfather or Fluffy
the dog or whatever,
an angelic being,
I think those
helping spirits can
do that in order to just
help you adjust and calm down
say, OK, you know,
here's what's happened.
Here's where you are.
Everything is fine.
Let me know when you
start remembering things.
I would do everything I
could to make it comfortable
for them to realize
where they are
and that they're really
much better off now.
>>NOORY: When the
day comes when you
do die, will you say to
yourself, here we go again?
>>BRUTON: [LAUGHS]
You know, you wonder.
I think someone
predicted one day
I'd be 92 years old walking
across a green field
and have a stroke, so it's
just like the switch goes off.
But I'm sure that
when it happens,
I'll be totally fine with it.
I will be.
>>NOORY: You have another book
you said you're working on.
>>BRUTON: I am.
I'm very excited about it.
>>NOORY: What's
it going to be on?
>>BRUTON: Well, a
lot of people were--
as they read the book or through
sharing it through talks,
people would say, how do
we put this into practice?
It resonates with us.
And so I really
meditated a lot on that.
And I started pulling out
more of the experience that
addresses how to create
the space in which to live
these truths, if you will.
And certainly, we can always
back it into meditation.
But the second
book will be called
"The Practice In Between--
The Art of Letting Go."
And as I--
>>NOORY: I like that.
>>BRUTON: Yeah.
Well, think about it.
In our world today,
there's never enough.
You need that one more thing.
I need that one more
degree or that one more
car or that one more suit
or that one more job status
increase.
>>NOORY: And we
don't need any of it.
>>BRUTON: And we don't.
We have everything.
When you hold a
baby, you're holding
someone who has all the
answers in the world to being
a happy spiritual being.
What happened?
[LAUGHS] What
happened is in that
as we socialize, as
we go into puberty,
we're driven by this need to
conform and not stand out.
Don't be the smartest kid in
class or something like that
and embarrass your
friends or whatever.
And so in that
desire to conform,
I think we really bury a
lot of our individual gifts
that we have to contribute
to life around us.
So I think it's important
just stop for a moment
and just, again, rather than
chase that one more thing,
which we'll be chasing
with our last breath--
>>NOORY: Right.
>>BRUTON: --let's go on an
assumption you have everything
you need right now.
You have the native
intelligence to figure out
whatever faces you
during the day,
you don't always need
a degree in this.
Look, I didn't study journalism,
and I was an NBC News war
correspondent.
I didn't study
satellite engineering,
and I shrunk a TV
truck into a backpack.
I didn't study filmmaking.
I have an Emmy for work
on "National Geographic."
There I go.
>>NOORY: There you go.
>>BRUTON: There we go.
Proof positive.
It's just about being
eternally curious
and never taking
no for an answer.
And I mean curious--
be interested in the
people you're with.
Be interested in what's going
on in other people's cultures.
And ask them and invite them to
your house to show them yours
and go to their
house and see theirs.
This is how we fix the
world, one person at a time.
>>NOORY: Jim, thanks for
being on "Beyond Belief."
>>BRUTON: Thank you, George.
It's been a pleasure.
>>NOORY: What an
amazing story, going
through his
near-death experience.
What's on the other side?
Coming back.
It teaches us lessons what we
can expect when that day comes.
I'm George Noory.
Thanks for watching
"Beyond Belief."
[THEME MUSIC]